# SP500-and-Bitcoin
In economic theory, Adam Smith (1776) believed that individuals pursuing their self-interest, through overall interactions, would lead to an “efficient outcome” benefiting society as a whole—a theory well known by the term “invisible hand.” Building on Adam Smith’s idea, Eugene Fama (1965) proposed the Efficient Market Hypothesis (EMH) and argued that under some conditions, financial markets would become efficient, making it impossible for individuals to gain excess returns from them. Among the conditions Fama mentioned, one was the presence of a frictionless market, along with several other necessary factors.
How far are we from a frictionless market in S&P500? In this post and the accompanying Python code, which is available on my GitHub, I conduct a simple experiment.
I examined weekends when the U.S. stock market is closed. During this time, there is no active market to reflect all pertinent incidents in the S&P 500 prices. In contrast, the cryptocurrency market remains active throughout the weekend. In this experiment, I aim to determine whether Bitcoin’s activity during weekends carries useful information that could help explain the stock market's behavior at the start of a new week.
To do this, I designed the experiment as follows:
I calculated the aggregate log return of Bitcoin by comparing the close price on Sunday (corresponding to the time when the last piece of information is available before the start of the new week’s stock market activity) to the close price on Friday (corresponding to the time when the last piece of information is available before the stock market closes). For the stock market, I calculated the log return by comparing the open price on Monday morning (new week) to the close price on Friday afternoon (previous week). The main objective is to experiment whether the crypto market contains knowledge that could contribute to better price discovery for the stock market’s Monday initiating trading activity. For This purpose, I have collected Data from 05/01/2022 up to 01/09/2025.
A simple correlation coefficient shows that there is 25.5 % correlation between the two variables. Also, a sign test shows that in 56.7% of the cases the sign of the return of Bitcoin on the weekend activity is indicating the sign of the return of S&P500, which is more than the probability of tossing a coin!
